Destination health checks documentation (#509)
microsoft/reverse-proxy: docs/docfx/articles/dests-health-checks.md

# Destination health checks

> In most of the real-world systems, it's expected for their nodes to occasionally experience transient issues and go down completely due to a variety of reasons such as an overload, resource leakage, hardware failures, etc. Ideally, it'd be desirable to completely prevent those unfornunate events from occuring in a proactive way, but the cost of designing and building such an ideal system is generally prohibitively high. However, there is another reactive approach which is cheaper and aimed to minimizing a negative impact failures cause on client requests by constantly analyzing nodes health to stop sending client traffic to ones became unhealthy until they have recovered. YARP implements this approach in the form of active and passive destination health checks.

Reviewer: Focusing on key points.
```suggestion
In most real-world systems it's expected for nodes to experience transient issues or go down completely due to a variety of reasons such as an overload, resource leakage, hardware failures, etc. Health checks can be used to minimize the impact of failures on client requests by constantly analyzing destination health and diverting client traffic away from unhealthy destinations until they have recovered. YARP implements both active and passive destination health checks.
```

Author: I think we'd better off keeping an introduction to failure handling approaches in distributed systems for people new to this topic. Jumping directly to a health check-based solution looks unjustified, otherwise.

Author: I will move the explanation closer to the end and make the topmost part more concrete as proposed above.

Author: Oh, it seems problematic in this case since this is an introduction to the whole document. Let's keep it here as is, but reorder each section's content as suggested below.

> ## Active health checks

Reviewer: The order of the explanation seems more targeted at someone learning the code rather than using health checks.

The current order is:
1. Purpose + Architecture
1. Built in policies
1. Configuration
1. Example

Proposed ordering:
1. Purpose
1. Example
1. Configuration
1. Built in policies
1. Architecture
1. Extensibility

The same applies to the passive checks.

Author: Hmm, normally you go from an abstract concept to a specific implementation. Or is it a new pattern already adopted somewhere else which has proved to be more convenient for readers? If that's the case, I can change.

Author: On the second thought, the proposed reordering does make sense and I realized we followed that order in the session affinity docs. Will change it.

Active health check settings can also be defined in code via the corresponding types in [Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Abstractions](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Abstractions) namespace mirroring the configuration contract.

`Cluster/HealthCheck/Active` section and [ActiveHealthCheckOptions](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Abstractions.ActiveHealthCheckOptions):

- `Enabled` - flag indicating whether active health check is enabled for a cluster. Default `false`
- `Interval` - period of sending health probing requests. Default `00:00:15`
- `Timeout` - probing request timeout. Default `00:00:10`
- `Policy` - name of a policy evaluating destinations' active health states. Mandatory parameter
- `Path` -  health check path on all cluster's destinations. Default `null`.

`Destination` section and [Destination](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Abstractions.Destination).

- `Health` - A dedicated health probing endpoint such as `http://destination:12345/`. Defaults `null` and falls back to `Destination/Address`.

#### Example
```JSON
"Clusters": {
      "cluster1": {

>         "LoadBalancing": {
>           "Mode": "Random"
>         },

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

      IPassiveHealthCheckPolicy --(update)--> DestinationInfo.DynamicState.Health.Passive
                  |
      (schedule a reactivation)
                  |
                  V
        IReactivationScheduler --(set to Unknown)--> DestinationInfo.DynamicState.Health.Passive
```

### Configuration
Passive health check settings are specified on the cluster level in `Cluster/HealthCheck/Passive` section. Alternatively, they can be defined in code via the corresponding types in [Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Abstractions](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Abstractions) namespace mirroring the configuration contract.

`Cluster/HealthCheck/Passive` section and [PassiveHealthCheckOptions](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Abstractions.PassiveHealthCheckOptions):

- `Enabled` - flag indicating whether passive health check is enabled for a cluster. Default `false`
- `Policy` - name of a policy evaluating destinations' passive health states. Mandatory parameter
- `ReactivationPeriod` - period after which an unhealthy destination's passive health state is reset to `Unknown` and it starts receiving traffic again. Default value is `null` which means the period will be set by a IPassiveHealthCheckPolicy

> #### Example

Reviewer: Add an example showing how to add the passive check middleware to a custom proxy pipeline, and note that it's included in the default pipeline.

There is one important difference from the active health check logic. Once a destination gets assigned an unhealthy passive state, it stops receiving all new traffic which blocks future health reevaluation. Thus without some extra step such destination would stuck in an unhealthy state forever. However, it doesn't actually happen because, in addition to assiging an unhealthy passive state, the policy also schedules a destination reactivation after the configured period. Reactivation means resetting the passive health state from `Unhealthy` back to the initial `Unknown` value which again makes destination eligible for getting traffic.

There are several cluster-wide configuration settings controlling passive health checks that can be set either in the config file or in code.

#### File example
```JSON
"Clusters": {
      "cluster1": {
        "HealthCheck": {
          "Passive": {
            "Enabled": "true",
            "Policy": "TransportFailureRate",
            "ReactivationPeriod": "00:02:00"
          }
        },
        "Metadata": {

>           "TransportFailureRateHealthPolicy.RateLimit": "0.5"

Author: I'd avoid providing too much details right now because we can decide to change things on that other PR. E.g. we introduced `IDestinationHealthUpdater` that is supposed to become a public service, but it's not covered here.

          }
        }
      }
```

#### Code example
```C#
var clusters = new[]
{
    new Cluster()
    {
        Id = "cluster1",
        HealthCheck = new HealthCheckOptions
        {
            Passive = new PassiveHealthCheckOptions
            {
                Enabled = true,
                Policy = HealthCheckConstants.PassivePolicy.TransportFailureRate,
                ReactivationPeriod = TimeSpan.FromMinutes(2)
            }
        },
        Metadata = new Dictionary<string, string> { { TransportFailureRateHealthPolicyOptions.FailureRateLimitMetadataName, "0.5" } },
        Destinations =
        {
            { "destination1", new Destination() { Address = "https://localhost:10000" } },
            { "destination2", new Destination() { Address = "https://localhost:10010" } }
        }
    }
};
```

### Configuration
Passive health check settings are specified on the cluster level in `Cluster/HealthCheck/Passive` section. Alternatively, they can be defined in code via the corresponding types in [Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Abstractions](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Abstractions) namespace mirroring the configuration contract.

> Passive health checks require the `PassiveHealthCheckMiddleware` to added into the pipeline for them to work. The default `void MapReverseProxy(this IEndpointRouteBuilder endpoints)` methods does it automatically, but in case of a manual pipeline construction the [ProxyMiddlewareAppBuilderExtensions.UsePassiveHealthChecks](xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.ProxyMiddlewareAppBuilderExtensions) method must be called to add that middleware as it's shown in `ReverseProxy.Config.Sample` project.

Author: `xref` to a method didn't work for me. I will re-check, but it doesn't seem supported.

`Cluster/HealthCheck/Passive` section and [PassiveHealthCheckOptions](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Abstractions.PassiveHealthCheckOptions):

- `Enabled` - flag indicating whether passive health check is enabled for a cluster. Default `false`
- `Policy` - name of a policy evaluating destinations' passive health states. Mandatory parameter
- `ReactivationPeriod` - period after which an unhealthy destination's passive health state is reset to `Unknown` and it starts receiving traffic again. Default value is `null` which means the period will be set by a `IPassiveHealthCheckPolicy`

### Design

> The main component is [PassiveHealthCheckMiddleware](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Middleware.PassiveHealthCheckMiddleware) sitting on the request pipeline and analyzing responses returned by destinations. For each response from a destination belonging to a cluster with enabled passive health checks, `PassiveHealthCheckMiddleware` invokes an [IPassiveHealthCheckPolicy](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Service.HealthChecks.IPassiveHealthCheckPolicy) specified for the cluster. The policy analyzes the given response, evaluates a new destination's passive health state and updates [DestinationHealthState.Passive](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.RuntimeModel.DestinationHealthState.Passive) value. When a destination gets marked as unhealthy, it stops receiving new requests until it gets reactivated after a configured period. Reactivation means DestinationHealthState.Passive value is reset from `Unhealthy` to `Unknown` that brings the destination back on the healthy destination list. The policy schedules a destinaton's reactivation with [IReactivationScheduler](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Service.HealthChecks.IReactivationScheduler) right after setting its `DestinationHealthState.Passive` to `Unhealthy`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main component is [PassiveHealthCheckMiddleware](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Middleware.PassiveHealthCheckMiddleware) sitting in the request pipeline and analyzing responses returned by destinations. For each response from a destination belonging to a cluster with enabled passive health checks, `PassiveHealthCheckMiddleware` invokes an [IPassiveHealthCheckPolicy](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Service.HealthChecks.IPassiveHealthCheckPolicy) specified for the cluster. The policy analyzes the given response, evaluates a new destination's passive health state and updates the [DestinationHealthState.Passive](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.RuntimeModel.DestinationHealthState.Passive) value. When a destination gets marked as unhealthy, it stops receiving new requests until it gets reactivated after a configured period. Reactivation means the destination's DestinationHealthState.Passive state is reset from `Unhealthy` to `Unknown` and the cluster's list of healthy destinations is rebuilt to include it. The policy schedules a destination's reactivation with [IReactivationScheduler](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Service.HealthChecks.IReactivationScheduler) right after setting its `DestinationHealthState.Passive` to `Unhealthy`.
```

```
        (respose to a proxied request)
                  |
      PassiveHealthCheckMiddleware
                  |

> (evaluate new destination's passive health state)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(evaluate destination's new passive health state)
```

Reviewer: This line is confusing because it implies PassiveHealthCheckMiddleware is the one doing the evaluation, not IPassiveHealthCheckPolicy. Should this be re-ordered or removed?

                  |
                  V
      IPassiveHealthCheckPolicy --(update)--> DestinationInfo.Health.Passive
                  |
      (schedule a reactivation)
                  |
                  V
        IReactivationScheduler --(set to Unknown)--> DestinationInfo.Health.Passive
```

> ## Healty destination collection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Healthy destination collection
```

> Under normal conditions, YARP considers only healthy destinations to select the one that will receive a request. On each cluster, they are stored in a list which gets rebuilt once any destination's health state changes. Active and passive health states are combined by the `AND` operator to filter out unhealthy destinations while rebuilding that list. The exact filtering rule as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under normal conditions, YARP excludes unhealthy destinations when selecting the one that will receive a request. On each cluster, they are stored in a list which gets rebuilt when any destination's health state changes. Active and passive health states are combined to filter out unhealthy destinations while rebuilding that list. The exact filtering rule as follows.
```

# Destinations health checks
In most of the real-world systems, it's expected for their nodes to occasionally experience transient issues and go down completely due to a variety of reasons such as an overload, resource leakage, hardware failures, etc. Ideally, it'd be desirable to completely prevent those unfornunate events from occuring in a proactive way, but the cost of desiging and building such an ideal system is generally prohibitively high. However, there is another reactive approach which is cheaper and aimed to minimizing a negative impact failures cause on client requests by constantly analyzing nodes health and stopping sending client traffic to ones became unhealthy until they have recovered. YARP implements this apporach in the form of active and passive destination health checks.

## Active health checks

> YARP proactively monitors destination health by sending periodic probing requests to designated health endpoints and analyzing responses. The main service in this process is [IActiveHealthMonitor](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Service.HealthChecks.IActiveHealthMonitor) that periodically creates probing requests via [IProbingRequestFactory](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Service.HealthChecks.IProbingRequestFactory), sends them to all [Destinations](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Abstractions.Destination) of each [Cluster](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Abstractions.Cluster) with enabled active health checks and then passes all the responses down to a [IActiveHealthCheckPolicy](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Service.HealthChecks.IActiveHealthCheckPolicy) specified for a cluster. IActiveHealthMonitor doesn't make the actual decision on whether a destination is healthy or not, but delegates this duty to an IActiveHealthCheckPolicy specified for a cluster. A policy is called to evaluate the new health states once all probing of all cluster's destination completed. It takes in a [ClusterInfo](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.RuntimeModel.ClusterInfo) representing the cluster's dynamic state and a set of [DestinationProbingResult](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Service.HealthChecks.DestinationProbingResult) storing cluster's destinations' probing results. Having evaluated a new health state for each destination, the policy actually updates [CompositeDestinationHealth.Active](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.RuntimeModel.CompositeDestinationHealth.Active) value.

Reviewer 2: I think there should be very simple implementations of policies here.

> YARP proactively monitors destination health by sending periodic probing requests to designated health endpoints and analyzing responses. The main service in this process is [IActiveHealthMonitor](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Service.HealthChecks.IActiveHealthMonitor) that periodically creates probing requests via [IProbingRequestFactory](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Service.HealthChecks.IProbingRequestFactory), sends them to all [Destinations](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Abstractions.Destination) of each [Cluster](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Abstractions.Cluster) with enabled active health checks and then passes all the responses down to a [IActiveHealthCheckPolicy](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Service.HealthChecks.IActiveHealthCheckPolicy) specified for a cluster. IActiveHealthMonitor doesn't make the actual decision on whether a destination is healthy or not, but delegates this duty to an IActiveHealthCheckPolicy specified for a cluster. A policy is called to evaluate the new health states once all probing of all cluster's destination completed. It takes in a [ClusterInfo](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.RuntimeModel.ClusterInfo) representing the cluster's dynamic state and a set of [DestinationProbingResult](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.Service.HealthChecks.DestinationProbingResult) storing cluster's destinations' probing results. Having evaluated a new health state for each destination, the policy actually updates [CompositeDestinationHealth.Active](xref:Microsoft.ReverseProxy.RuntimeModel.CompositeDestinationHealth.Active) value.

Author: Added kind of an ASCII-style flow diagram.

There are default built-in implementation for all of the aforementioned components which can also be replaced with custom ones when necessary.

### Built-in policies
There is one built-in active health check policy - `ConsecutiveFailuresHealthPolicy`. It counts consecutive health probe failures and marks a destination as unhealthy once the given threshold is reached. On the first successful response, a destination is marked as healthy and the counter is reset.
The policy parameters are set in the cluster's metadata as follows:

`ConsecutiveFailuresHealthPolicy.Threshold` - number of consecutively failed active health probing requests required to mark a destination as unhealthy. Default `2`.

### Configuration
All but one of active health check settings are specified on the cluster level in `Cluster/HealthCheck` section. The only exception is an optional `Destination/Health` element specifying a separate active health check endpoint. The actual health probing URI is constructed as `Destination/Address` (or `Destination/Health` when it's set) + `Cluster/HealthCheck/Path`.

> `Cluster/HealthCheck` section:

Author: Added.

- `Enabled` - flag indicating whether active health check is enabled for a cluster. Default `false`
- `Interval` - period of sending health probing requests. Default `00:00:15`
- `Timeout` - probing request timeout. Default `00:00:10`
- `Policy` - name of a policy evaluating destinations' active health states. Mandatory parameter
- `Path` -  health check path on all cluster's destinations. Default `null`.

`Destination` section.

> - `Health` - dedicated health probing endpoint. Default `null`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Health` - A dedicated health probing endpoint such as `http://destination:12345/`. Defaults `null` and falls back to `Destination/Address`.
```
